This video is all about Albert Einstein,
yes, that guy again. Einstein is famous
for his theory of general relativity. It’s
taught us that gravity is not a force. And
that’s probably the most misunderstood physics
fact, ever. Like, even physicists get it wrong,
all the time. Gravity is not a force. And
since there’s no force pushing down on you,
that means you are currently
accelerating upward. Unless
you’re watching this from the ISS, in
which case please say hi to the moon.
How does gravity work if it’s not a
force? That’s what we’ll talk about today.
An accelerometer is a device that measures
acceleration. If you’d hold an accelerometer
steadily in your hand, it’d tell you it’s
accelerated upwards. This isn’t hypothetical,
weird theoretical physics talk.
You can buy one and just see what
it says. This is an example of how the
reading of an accelerometer looks like
when it’s lying still on a table. It
tells you it’s accelerated upwards.
And this is entirely correct. If you hold an
accelerometer still on the surface on earth,
it’s indeed accelerated upward. Why does
that surprise you? If you hold something
on your hand you feel that it's pressing
against your hand, downward. It’s like
when you’re trying to accelerate a car
with your hand. It’ll push against it.
Ifyou hold something in your hand, that’s not
the gravitational force pushing it down. Because
gravity isn’t a force. It’s pushing on your
hand because you are accelerating it upward.
Why is the thing in your hand accelerated if
you don’t move your hand? It’s because *you
are accelerated. And *you are accelerated
because there’s a force pushing on you from
below. That’s the floor, or rather the atomic
bonds in the floor and in the ground below.
You see, the entire earth has internal
pressure, otherwise it’d collapse. That
pressure generates a force on everything on the
surface. And as Newton taught us, a force creates
acceleration. So that pressure of Earth creates
a force which accelerates you on the surface.
But wait, you may say, there’s also
the gravitational force pushing down,
so the two forces balance to zero, right?
No—oo. Because gravity is not a force.
Gravity is a consequence of moving
in a space-time that’s been curved
by the presence of masses. If there are
no masses nearby to curve space-time,
it’s flat. So long as there’s no force
acting on an object in this flat space-time,
the object will move in a straight line. If
there are masses nearby, space-time will curve,
and the object no longer move on a straight
line, even in the absence of a force.
The usual way to explain this is with a large
marble on a rubber sheet, that deforms the rubber.
This is an analogy for how, say, a planet curves
space-time around it. And then another, smaller
marble which seems to be “attracted” to the bigger
one. It’s a pretty good visualization, it’s just
that you shouldn’t ask why the big marble bends
the rubber, then it gets really confusing.
So in this curved space around a planet,
if there’s no force acting on you,
you fall towards the planet. That’s not an
acceleration. But if something gets in your way,
like the surface of the planet, then *that
creates a force. So now you’re accelerated.
This is why there’s no force pushing down on you
right now. There’s only a force pushing up. If you
took away the surface of earth, you’d fall. And if
you fell, there’d be again no force acting on you.
This is also why the earth would collapse if
it had no internal pressure. It’s not because
there’s a gravitational force acting on the
matter. Because gravity isn’t a force. It’s
because without internal pressure, stuff
would just freely fall in the curvature
that it itself creates. Without internal
pressure, earth would form a tiny black
hole about 3 mm in diameter and the
real estate market would go to hell.
But let’s go back to the accelerometer to see what
else they can tell us. The easiest example of an
accelerometer is a spring. Yes, a plain boring
spring. Suppose you put a spring into outer space,
empty space, flat space. How does it get there?
I don’t know, maybe Bob the astronaut lost it
on a spacewalk? I hear these things happen.
Ok, there’s a spring in outer space for whatever
reason. It’ll have some extension. Now if you tie
that spring to a rocket and that rocket blasts
off, what’s going to happen with the spring?
It’ll expand so long as the velocity of the rocket
changes. Why is that? Well, as Newton taught us
force equals mass times acceleration. So if you
accelerate one end of the spring, that creates
a force and that force stretches the spring. You
can measure how much it stretches, and from that
you can calculate how much it was accelerated.
Yeah, I know this isn’t exactly rocket science
even if it is, but bear with me for a moment. This
example tells us three very important things.
First, you can use a spring to measure
acceleration. It’s not the only way to do it, and
maybe not even a particularly good one, but works.
Second, you cannot, of course, use the
spring to measure the velocity of the rocket,
because velocity in and of itself is a
meaningless concept. You can only talk
about relative velocities, not absolute
ones. This is why Einstein’s theories have
the word “relative” in them.
This brings us to the third,
and most important point that we learn from
the spring. Acceleration is not relative,
it’s absolute. You can measure
how much you’re accelerated,
for example with that spring. And you
can tell when you are not accelerated.
So we have a spring on a rocket in outer space,
alright. What’s this got to do with gravity.
Well this is where Einstein’s genius comes
in. Einstein said, let’s put the spring in
a box from which you can’t look out. You have no
idea what’s going on outside. We tie the box with
you and the spring to a rocket. The rocket blasts
off. What happens? Well, the spring expands again.
Einstein now said that if you’re in the box,
you can’t tell whether you’re being accelerated,
or whether you are sitting still on
the surface of a planet. He then said
if there isn’t any measurement that you
can do to tell these situations apart,
they’re physically indistinguishable. That is,
in a small box, the effect of gravity on the
surface of a planet is indistinguishable from
acceleration in the absence of gravity. This
is what’s called the “Equivalence Principle”.
The point where people usually go wrong is to
conclude that because gravity is indistinguishable
from acceleration, that means gravity accelerates
you. But that isn’t so. Because to accelerate
something, you need a force. And gravity is
not a force. Einstein’s equivalence principle
says that you are accelerated if you sit *still
in a gravitational field. This is because the
only way to sit still in a gravitational field
is to have a force acting on you that prevents
you from falling. For example, because that
floor is pushing on you. But you can’t tell
this apart from being accelerated in the
absence of gravity, in a flat spacetime.
Imagine for example you are falling into a black
hole. No, I don’t mean YouTube recommendations,
I mean a literal black hole. You are in a box with
your spring and without any rocket boosters and so
on. The black hole curves space-time, and you can
use the equations of Einstein’s general relativity
to calculate what happens. They’ll tell you
that if you get too close to the horizon,
you’ll inevitably cross it and then you’ll end
up in the singularity. Which might not be there,
but that’s a different story. The point
for today is that your spring won’t budge
because there’s no force acting on
you. Because gravity is not a force.
This is what physicists mean by “free fall”
in a gravitational field. It means there’s
no force acting on you, so you’re not
accelerated. A zero-g flight is the
closest you’ll get to that on earth
– at least if you want to survive.
The idea of a zero-g flight is exactly einstein’s
elevator experiment. That if you’re in a box whose
floor is not pushing on you, that’s the plane,
you can’t tell whether you’re in outer space far
away from any heavy objects, where space-time
is flat, or whether you’re freely falling in a
curved space-time. Physically, it’s exactly
the same. So the zero-g flight is indeed a
good simulation for outer space. And why is that?
It’s because gravity is not a force. In the plane,
you are falling in a gravitational field,
but there’s no force acting on you.
Now, I sometimes hear people say that “zero-g”
is a bad term because it suggests that there’s no
gravity, but of course the curvature of space-time
doesn’t go away just because you sit in a plane.
And that’s right, but zero-g doesn’t mean
zero-gravity. The “g” is the local acceleration
that you experience if you are in rest in
the gravitational field. If you are on the
earth’s surface, that acceleration is roughly
nine point eight meters per square second,
as you probably all learned in kindergarten.
Though, strictly speaking, this gravitational
acceleration isn’t constant. The acceleration
that you experience on the surface of
earth drops if you go to higher altitudes,
and it also slightly depends on what the
ground is made of. This is why measuring
this acceleration tells you something about the
composition of earth’s mantle, but I digress.
To come back to zero-g flights. On
a zero-g flight your acceleration
is indeed almost zero because you’re
not at rest with the surface of earth,
that’s why it feels like free fall.
Of course it’s not exactly zero,
because you always move around somewhat that way
or this way, or if you’re Rohin you are doing CPR,
but it’s pretty close to zero. So I’d say, zero-g
is a good description. Same thing on the ISS.
Okay, but I can see that you’re still
confused because you learned that
acceleration is a change in velocity.
And if you’re not changing velocity,
you’re just standing on earth,
how can you be accelerated?
Well, the entire point of einstein’s
theory of relativity is that velocity
is not an absolute. What you mean if you say
you’re not changing velocity is that you’re
not moving relative to the surface of earth.
But this doesn’t mean you have zero velocity,
because that’s a meaningless statement.
It just means you are not moving relative
to something else that’s accelerated the
same way, which is the surface of earth.
You can, however, return to talking about
Newtonian gravity by re-defining what you mean
by “no acceleration”. In general relativity, as
we have just seen, you are accelerated if you do
not move relative to the surface of the earth,
say because you stand on top of a building.
If you jump and fall, you are not accelerated
because there’s no force acting on you. If you
hit the floor, you are very suddenly accelerated
again which has, erm, measurable consequences.
In Newtonian gravity, you introduce this
new force that you call the gravitational
force and say if you’re on top of the
building that force of gravity cancels
that from the building pushing on you. So
now there’s no net force acting on you and
Newton says you’re not accelerated. If you
jump off the building, Newton would say,
the force from below disappears and there’s only
the gravitational force acting on you and you’re
accelerated. And if you hit the ground,
you suddenly return to zero acceleration.
The Newtonian picture is the one we learn
at school, and it’s useful so long as you
are on earth. But strictly speaking it’s
wrong because you can’t just redefine what
you mean by zero acceleration. You
can’t do that because acceleration
it’s not a relativity quantity. If you’re
staying in place in a gravitational field,
so you are not falling, then you are not at zero
acceleration as any accelerometer will tell you.
Now of course physicists are no linguistic
saints, and they’ll sometimes refer to
gravity as a force even though it isn’t.
A typical example is when they speak of
the “four fundamental forces of nature”. If
they’re being careful though, they’ll refer
to it as the “gravitational interaction”
and the “four fundamental interactions”.
But often they don’t. I think they really just
call it a force because that starts with an “F”.
In a nutshell, why is gravity not a
force? Because if you are only exposed
to the gravitational interaction, you fall,
and that is measurably not an acceleration.
If you need to freshen up your knowledge on
forces and Newton’s laws before taking on
Einstein’s ideas, the best place to start
is brilliant dot org. They have lovely
courses on Newtonian gravity and classical
mechanics and even on special relativity.
And not just that. Brilliant offers courses
on a large variety of topics in science,
computer science, and mathematics. If you
want to learn something new or brush up on
something you learned long ago, Brillant is an
easy and fun way to do it. All their courses are
interactive with follow-up questions. They
come with graphics that you can play with,
and some have little executable python scripts
or videos with demonstration experiments.
I like learning things on brilliant because I can
do it everywhere and whenever I have the time. And
they’re adding new content every month, on timely
topics such as solar panels, quantum computing,
neural nets, or computational biology. I even
have my own course on Brilliant which is a
beginner’s course to quantum mechanics.
This will introduce you to the basics,
like what superpositions and entanglement
are, and how interference works. And
after that you can continue with the
other quantum courses on Brilliant.
If you want to give it a try,
sign up for free using our link
brilliant dot org slash sabine. You’ll
get to try out everything for the first
30 days and the first 200 people will
get 20% off their premium subscription,
so go and check it out. If it works
for me, maybe it’ll work for you, too.
Thanks for watching, see you next week.